Project 2

Overview:

The website I put together creates an organized and professional online presence of myself, which I did not previously have. The site shows that I have made a lot of progress in the course of this class. The site rzinsmeister.com validates and meets all requirements listed for project 2.  

When I started the course I had never written HTML or CSS, let alone thought about designing for mobile or using a grid. I believe I have learned those skills necessary to meet the requirements of the project and thereby shown my progress in the class. I think there is always more to learn about building web pages, but from project 1 to project 2 I was able to add new aspects to my web design. In project 2 I made sure there was a unified design, added content and created multiple pages that you can navigate among in a sensible way.

The website I created has a domain and is hosted, which I had never sorted out before. I was able to buy my domain from 1 & 1 and the hosting is from A Small Orange. I chose A Small Orange and 1 & 1 because they were very cheap to purchase from. Although other services may have been better, many were more expensive than I could pay.  It was a challenge to figure out how to have the page go live, because it was brand new. I ended up playing around with the options and reading tutorials to figure out how to set up my site. I’m certain I will have to continue to do this to maintain the site. Although we had some reading on webhosting it still felt very foreign to sort out. I was able to use Git at my hosting and SSH to sign in. 

The pages are on 24px line height and a 978px width. I went with 24px, because I liked the space it had between the lines and went with a 978px grid because it was recommended in class and was not that attached to another size. The site works for smaller screens and presents the information in clear and readable format no matter the screen size. In order to do this I created 4 media queries and tried to format the content so that no matter which page was being read at the 300px query they could use some of the same CSS. I tried to limit my CSS and reduce the redundancy. Although I think it could still be cleaned up or restructured to be simpler potentially, overall it has come a long from where I started out and I was happy with the result. I used comment tags to make sure that I remembered what achieved what, the most confusing of which I believe was the fact that I chose to do two different headings. I wanted a different style for the front page because it wasn’t content rich and I used two different headings to achieve this, but felt that they related enough that it was still cohesive. 

I created a print.css file that fits with the design as well, by matching a simple style element on my site when printed. I would like to add pdf’s of my portfolio and resume items at some point, because I feel that would be a better way to make sure it appears formatted as I would like and provide to potential employers. I’m not sure that the way it prints is perfect, but I think it is challenging to know when the page may break on different machines and therefore where to force a page break. The only forced page break I felt was necessary was for the images in my portfolio, because the printing was cutting those in half. Otherwise I let the content break where it fell. 

Design:

I wanted a simple design for my site because I wanted the site to be as flexible as possible. I was trying to create a simple neutral base, with the idea that in the future, once I learn how to add more design, I could add various colors to contrast or additional design. I left the background primarily white, but did change the font to give the page a look of more space. I wanted the index page to be fairly clean with a different looking menu, because I do not have blog or considerable content. I wanted the index menu to sit slightly off to the right to show it differently than the other pages. The menu on the subsequent pages ended up being more standard and centered than I originally envisioned, however, the design I ended up with ended up scaling best while giving the general look I was going for.  

It was challenging having to design for all devices and create a design that I could implement. I created a number of different versions of my sites and different sized media queries before I realized how I could get scaling to work. I ended up using 4 different media queries to get my page to scale in a way that matched how I wanted my site to look. When I created the design I didn’t understand that even the width of my words in my menu would affect how my menu wrapped and therefore where I should break the page. I think that I learned a lot through trial and error of how these different aspects of design fit together in a responsive site. 

I wanted the content I put up to have a purpose and to be organized, not just filling up space. With that in mind I created just four menu items that I thought would fit my needs. However, the problem with my design is that if I were to add additional menu items I may need to redesign my page breaks and how my menu works. It was my first attempt at creating a design that would work at all levels, but it ended up being very size dependent on the menu. I had to choose menu titles that were short enough to fit evenly.  

I had wanted to play more with style on the page and making it look more like my sketches, however, I simply ran out of time to make that happen. I focused on making sure the basics were solid and tried to reduce the amount of code. I did not want to be redundant in my CSS and wanted to organize my html in pages with tagging that would make sense. This took more time than I realized. I found out that the CSS I had done for Project 1 for my resume was for the most part not useful any longer. Also, I wanted to find a way to make my mobile view work for multiple pages and not have to write two sets of CSS for each page. This was really a challenge, because especially for my resume I didn't always want my headings to match on other pages. My initial CSS was not on the grid so I had to start over a number of times while building my site. I found that it was easier to be consistent with my tagging outside of my resume.  

Designing for a grid was another concept that I tried to implement in this website. The horizontal grid felt fairly straightforward and easy to implement, although I did miscount my pixels it was relatively easy to get back on track once I started from scratch and didn’t have old CSS messing with what I was trying to do. However, using the vertical grid was not as easy. I tried to make my media queries based on the 978px grid and make sure that my content was centered and maintained margins. I based my math off of that grid, however, because my site didn’t utilize a number of columns I don’t think I got to realize the full power of designing for grids. 

Conclusion:

In project 2 I became more comfortable playing with CSS and HTML, because I had to spend so much time reworking what I wrote. In this project I did not simply stop working because the site doing what I wanted to but tried to look at how I could write the structure better. However, this is not to say there isn’t room for improvement. For the future of the site I will need to think about how I will add content to the portfolio section and also how I will handle the resume section. I have thought I should add more content to include a fuller resume and then also the option to download it. I also believe I would need a redesign if I were to add additional menu items. However, I still think the basic idea of a very simple and structurally sound site makes the most sense for using as a resume tool, as I cannot be sure in what format potential employers would open my page and therefore happy with the result despite the fact it will need additions and adaptations later on. 
	

